Joseph Kahn wasn’t taken to court for
displaying ‘obscene’ objects or images.
At the time, viewing anatomical
collections like Kahn’s
was an accepted, interesting,
educational pursuit for the public.
In 1853 the editor of The Lancet, Thomas Wakley,
had only one complaint about Kahn’s exhibition,
and that was that sometimes
ladies were admitted.
Kahn was taken to court instead because
when he found himself in financial difficulties
he got into partnership with a quack business.
Today, we think of quacks as people
operating outside orthodox Western medicine.
That wasn’t always the case.
In the 1800s, many quacks adhered to
the principles of conventional medicine.
Their remedies might not work,
but conventional ones might not either.
What the medical establishment
was more concerned about
was that quacks were exploiting the sick,
and sometimes the well,
using smart marketing tactics
to part them from their cash.
Of course, persuading somebody to buy something
they don’t really need isn’t strictly illegal.
So it wasn’t until the Obscene Publications Act became law
in 1857 that they could do much about this.
The Act wasn’t just used to prosecute people
hawking pornographic images.
It could be applied in any situation where
the public was in danger of being corrupted.
Kahn’s publications that included advertisements
for treatments for venereal disease, fell into this category.
Reporting on the successful prosecution brought by
the ‘Society for the Suppression of Vice’,
The Lancet completely changed its tune.
They described Kahn’s displays
as 'obscene and disgusting'.
And as further prosecutions were brought against
other public anatomy collections across the country,
the idea of exploring the
wonder of the human body
transformed from acceptable,
educational entertainment
to a shameful taboo.